---
layout: post
title:  "An update on Dyvil (v0.16.0)"
date:   2016-02-06 00:00:00 +0200
categories: jekyll update
---

It's been a while since the last update on Dyvil, back then it was in version `0.6.0`. Now, we already reached milestone `0.`**`16`**`.0`, which is the equivalent of *10* major releases! Anyway, away from the numbers, let's get talking about features. The following are notable:

- The Dyvil Property Format
- Improvements to Closures and Partially Applied Functions
- References
- Traits and Super Type Arguments
- Initializer Blocks
- Reified Type Parameters
- Pattern Matching

## The Dyvil Property Format

The Dyvil Property Format is a text format specifically designed and created for configuration files. A typical DPF file might look like this:

```
sources {
    dir = "./src"
    include = [ "*.dyv" ]
    exclude = [ "*.java", "*.scala" ]
}

output.dir = "./output"

libraries = [ "./libs/dyvil-property-format.jar" ]

jar {
    name = "myprogram"
    vendor = "clashsoft"
    version = "v0.1.0"

    main {
        class = "com.clashsoft.myprogram.Main"
        args = [ "--verbose", "-i" ]
    }
}
```

As you can see, DPF files consist of a number of `nodes { }` (or blocks) containing `properties = value`. This particular example could be configuration file for the Dyvil compiler. You can learn more about the Dyvil Property Format on the [documentation page](https://dyvil.gitbooks.io/dyvil-language-reference/content/tools/dyvil-property-format.html).

## Closures and Partially Applied Functions

Previously, closures (or lambda expressions) where always defined with an `=>` arrow:

```java
any => void print = x => println x
(int, int) => int add = (x, y) => x + y
```

Over the last few updates, a number of more visually pleasing and concise ways have been added to represent lambda expressions and call higher-order functions. For example, the `Predef.repeat(int, => void)` method is defined like this:

```java
void repeat(int n, => void f) = for (int i : 1 .. n) f()
```

And can be called with a trailing block of code:

```java
repeat(3) {
    println "Hey"
}
```

This almost makes it look like repeat is a special kind of statement, while it's in fact nothing special at all!

The next interesting higher-order function is the `foldLeft` method that all `Collection`s provide. First, we create a list:

```java
List[int] list = [ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 ]
```

Then, we call the list's `foldLeft` using a so-called **partially applied function**, denoted using the `_` symbol:

```java
int result = list.foldLeft(0, _ + _) // result = 15
```

This is the equivalent of the following, using lambda expressions:

```java
int result = list.foldLeft(0, (carry, element) => carry + element)
```

Alternatively, we can use a trailing block closure:

```java
int result = list.foldLeft(0) { $0 + $1 }
```

In this case, `$0` and `$1` are the implicit parameter names.

## References

Many programming languages have a notion of **references** (or pointers in low-level languages like C). They effectively allow you to pass fields (properties, attributes) or local variables to a method, which will then proceed to modify their value. Dyvil also allows you to do this in a clean and safe manner. In the following code snippet, we declare a method `inc` that takes a reference to an `int` and increments the value of the field that reference points to.

```java
void inc(int& i) = i.set(i.get + 1)

int i = 0
inc(&i) // read '&i' as 'reference to i'
println i // prints '1'
```

The above example uses explicit references, which require an explicit usage of the reference operator `&` at the use site. However, we can also make it implicit by using **by-reference parameters**:

```java
void int(var int i) = i++ // get and set are called implicitly

inc i // works as above
```

## Traits and Super Arguments

Another new concept in Dyvil that borrowed it's name from Scala is `trait`s. Traits are effectively interfaces with default methods that are not required to be implemented by sub-classes.

```java
trait Named
{
    String name() = "unnamed"
}

object UnnamedPerson implements Named

UnnamedPerson unnamed = UnnamedPerson.instance
println unnamed.name // prints 'unnamed'
```

Super Arguments are a new way to declare super constructor arguments without introducing too much boilerplate. What previously looked like this:

```java
class Person(String name)
class Student extends Person
{
    private String email

    public init(String name, String email)
    {
        super.init(name)
        this.email = email
    }
}
```

Can now be reduced to just two lines of code:

```java
class Person(String name)
class Student(String name, String email) extends Person(name)
```

## Initializer Blocks

Initializer Blocks are effectively the same as in Java, with a minor syntactic difference. What in Java look like this:

```java
class Foo
{
    String s;

    {
        System.out.println("Constructor Called")
        s = "abc";
    }
}
```

Works in Dyvil almost as easily:

```java
class Foo
{
    String s
    
    init
    {
        println "Constructor Called"
        s = "abc"
    }
}
```

The way initializers work stays the same:

```java
Foo foo = new Foo // prints "Constructor Called"
println foo.s // prints 'abc'
```

## Reified Type Parameters

Dyvil now allows you to define method Type Parameters that are available at runtime within the body of the method.

```java
Class[T] toClass[@Reified T]() = class T // like T.class in Java, but valid

println Test.[String]toClass // prints 'class java.lang.String'
```

This also works for more complex (generic) types:

```java
Type[T] toType[@Reified T]() = type T

println Test.[Map[String, List[String]]toType
// prints 'dyvil.collection.Map[java.lang.String,
//                              dyvil.collection.List[java.lang.String]]
```

## Pattern Matching

**Pattern Matching** is an extremely useful feature in functional programming languages, it has also been worked on throughly in Dyvil. Let's take a look at a classic example, decomposing an optional value:

```java
Option[int] option = Some(1)
option match {
    case Some(int i) => println i
    case None => println "No value for you"
}
```

The `match` statement is the replacement for the traditional `switch` in Java - but it is much more powerful, being able to decompose complicated compound values:

```java
(int, (long, double)) tuple = (1, (2L, Math.PI)) // Tuple[int, Tuple[long, double]]
tuple match {
    case (_, (long l, double d)) => println "Long Value: \(l), Double Value: \(d)"
    case _ => println "unknown value"
}
```

Here, `_` represents a *wildcard pattern*  that will match any value, while `long l` and `double d` are binding patterns that bind values to variable names.

You may also want to simply `match` any `int` value - in which case Dyvil provides you with multiple options:

```java
int value = 7
value match {
    case 0 => println "zero"
    case 1 => println "one"
    case 2 | 3 | 5 => println "prime"
    case 7 => println "found it"
    case _ => println "invalid"
}
```

This example uses `or` patterns, used to match any of the provided `int` literal patterns.

## Conclusion

As you can see, a lot of things have been going on on the Dyvil Project. Apart from all there features, many bugs have also been squashed and performance improvements have been made to make sure the language runs a stably and smootly as possible. If you want to test it out, grab the `dyvil-v*.jar` over at the [GitHub Releases Page](https://github.com/Dyvil/Dyvil/releases) and run it with your favorite terminal. The Dyvil REPL will allow you to type an expression or declaration and see what happens.

Have fun hacking!
