---
layout: post
title:  "Dyvil Update: v0.26.0 to v0.29.0"
date:   2017-04-10 22:00:00 +0200
author: Clashsoft
categories: release
---

Three months have passed again since the last blog update, but we've been busy making Dyvil more robust and expressive
than ever, with many new features and resolved issues in the v0.26.0 and v0.27.1 updates. The following major changes
have been implemented, along with minor improvements and bugfixes:

- Type Operators
- Union and Intersection Types
- The `none` Bottom Type
- Overhauled Optional Types
- Enhanced Visibility and `explicit` Parameters
- Abstract Static Methods

Additionally, a new tool was introduced in v0.26.0 called **GenSrc**. You can learn more about it
[here](https://dyvil.gitbooks.io/dyvil-language-reference/content/tools/gensrc.html). 

## Type Operators

Introduced in Dyvil v0.26.0, Type Operators are exactly what they are named after: Operators applied to Types. The best
way to show this is an example:

```swift
infix operator ~> { 120, right }

type ~> <K, V> = Map<K, V>
```

These two declarations define two things:
A standard-issue custom operator named `~>` with precedence `120` and right-associativity, and
a generic type-alias with the same name, that simply plugs its type arguments into a `Map<...>`.

We can now make use of the latter whenever we want to denote something that has type `Map<K, V>`:

```swift
let map: int ~> String = [ 1 : "a", 2 : "b" ]
```

This declaration is semantically equivalent to

```swift
let map: Map<int, String> = ...
```

You can also chain multiple types and operators together to form a new type. This uses the same precedence and associativity
rules that are already known from ordinary expressions. In addition to that, you can also use prefix and postfix type
operators:

```swift
type(int ~> String ~> long) == type(Map<int, Map<String, int>>)

int?         // Option Types
int | String // Union Types
int & String // Intersection Types
```

## Union and Intersection Types

Union and Intersection Types are special types that were added in v0.26.0 and rely on the new type operator syntax.
Union Types use the infix operator `|` while Intersection Types use `&` and have a higher precedence. The following
examples illustrate how they work:

```swift
func foo(v: int | String) = ...

foo(1) // ok
foo("ab") // ok
foo(1.5) // not ok - double is not a subtype of int | String
```

As you can see, the compiler only allows values to be passed to `foo` if they are either `int`s or `String`s. Since
`double` is not a subtype of either, the third example gets rejected.

While Union Types represent the set *union* of two types, the available methods usable with the union type as the receiver
are computed with the *intersection*. This means only those methods are available on an object of type `T|U` which are
available through the common super-types of `T` and `U`. For `int` and `String`, the common super types are `Object` and
`Comparable`. Thus, you can call any method from these two classes (unless you use a cast).

```swift
func bar(c: Comparable & Serializeable) = ...

bar("abc") // ok
bar(1) // ok

let c: Comparable = ...
bar(c) // not ok
```

For an Intersection Type to be considered a super-type of another type, both sides have to be super type. In other words,
you have to pass some object that is *both* `Comparable` and `Serializeable` to the `foo` function to pass type checking.
With that in mind, Intersection Types can be viewed as the opposite of union types. They represent the set *intersection*
of two types, and provide the *union* of available methods. Given an object of type `T&U`, you can call methods on it
that are defined in either `T` or `U`.

## The Bottom Type `none`

Complementing Union and Intersection Types, a new extension to the type system was introduced in v0.28.0 called `none`,
the bottom type. Similar to how `any` is the super-type of every other type, `none` is the sub-type of every type.
An expression of type `none` can thus be assigned to any other type. Every `throw` statement has this type, and functions
that always throw an exception or error can also use it to indicate this property.

```swift
func error() -> none = throw new Error()

var i: int = 10
i = error() // valid

var s: String = error() // valid
```

## Overhauled Optional Types

In version v0.28.0, we made a large set of changes to the Dyvil type system called **Optional Types**. They provide
a way to specify whether or not `null` can be returned or accepted at the type-level. In the below example, the variable
`opt` holds a value of type `String?` (read Optional String). This means you can assign any expression of type `String`,
or `null`.

```swift
var opt: String? = "abc"
```

An optional value of type `T?` cannot be used like an expression of type `T`, i.e. it cannot be assigned to `T`.
 
```swift
var str: String = opt // error, because opt could be null
var upper = opt.toUpperCase // error, would cause an NPE at runtime if opt == null 
```

An optional value can be unwrapped to a non-optional one using the `!` postfix operator. This has the effect of
performing a null check and causing an NPE if the optional value is `null`.

```swift
var upper = opt!.toUpperCase // valid
```

If you know something will rarely actually be `null` or don't care about runtime errors, you can use an **Implicitly
Unwrapped Optional Type**. It uses the postfix type operator `!` and automatically performs calls to the `!` unwrap
method.

```swift
var opt: String! = null
opt = "abc"
var str: String = opt // valid
var upper = opt.toUpperCase // valid
```

## Enhanced Visibility and `explicit` Parameters

Update v0.29.0 introduced two new visibility modifiers, `private protected` and `package private`. The former is
a more restricted version of `protected` that only allows access from sub-classes. The latter is an explicit form
of the default visibility in Java. It was introduced because members now have a default visibility that depends on their
kind. The following table shows the default visibility for different member kinds:

| Kind            | Default     |
|-----------------|-------------|
| Header          | `public`    |
| Type Alias      | `public`    |
| Class           | `public`    |
| Class Parameter | `protected` |
| Constructor     | `public`    |
| Method          | `public`    |
| Property        | `public`    |
| Field           | `protected` |

Parameters can now have a new modifier called `explicit`. It requires the use of a parameter label at all call sites.

```swift
func foo(i: int, explicit j: int = 10)

foo(1)       // valid, uses default value
foo(1, 2)    // error, j has no explicit label
foo(1, j: 2) // valid, j has explicit label
```

## Abstract Static Methods

A minor change in v0.29.0 was support for `static abstract` methods. They were added to complement the Virtual Static
Methods from v0.24.0. An example is shown below:

```swift
interface FromString { abstract static func apply(value: String) -> FromString }

case class Name(let value: String) implements FromString

case class Text(let value: String) implements FromString

func empty<T: FromString>() -> T = T() as T

empty<FromString> // AbstractMethodError at runtime

let n = empty<Name> // n: Name = Name("")
let t = empty<Text> // t: Text = Text("")
```
